# Python Objects

## Warning
* This lecture is very much about definitions and mechanics for objects
* This lecture is a lot more about "how it works" and less about "how you use it"
* You won't get the entire picture until this is all looked at in the context of a real problem
* So please suspend disbelief and learn technique for the next 50 or so slides..

## Review of Programs
* Input, process and output
* Series of steps

## Object Oriented
* A program is made up of many cooperating objects
* Instead of being the "whole program" - each object is a little "island" within the program and cooperatively working with other objects
* A program is made up of one or more objects working together - objects make use of each other's capabilities

## Object
* An object is a bit of self-contained Code and Data
* A key aspect of the Object approach is to break the problem into smaller understandable parts (divide and conquer)
* Objects have boundaries that allow us to ignore un-needed detail
* We have been using objects all along:
    - String Objects
    - Integer Objects
    - Dictionary Objects
    - List Objects

* Program has some input
* Data moves between objects
* Data/code has their own boundaries
* Don't have to worry about the inside eg. lists and dictionaries

## Definitions
* Class - a template - Dog
* Method or Message - A defined capability of a class
* Field or attribute - A bit of data in a class - length
* Object or Instance - A particular instance of a class - Lassie


## Terminology: Class
A pattern (exemplar) of a class. The class of Dog defines all possible dogs by listing the characteristics and behaviours they can have; the object Lassie is one particular dog, with particular versions of the characteristics. A Dog has fur; Lassie has brown-and-white fur.

## Terminology: Instance
One can have an instance of a class or a particular object. The instance is the actual object created at runtime. In programmer jargon, the Lassie object is an instance of the dog class. The set of values of the attributes of a particular object is called its state. The object consists of state and behaviour that's defined in the object's class.

**Object and instance are often used interchangeably**

## Terminology: Method
An object's abilities. In language, methods are verbs. Lassie, being a Dog, has the ability to bark. So bark() is one of Lassie's methods. She may have other methods as well, for example sit() or eat() or walk() or save_timmy(). Within the program, using a method usually affects only one particular object; all Dogs can bark, but you need only one particular dog to do the barking.

## A sample class
`class` is a reserved word  

```Python
class PartyAnimal: # This is the template for making PartyAnimal objects
    x = 0 # Each PartyAnimal object has a bit of data.

    def party(self):
        self.x = self.x + 1
        print("so far", self.x)

an = PartAnimal() # Construct a PartyAnimal object and store in `an`
an.party()
# So far 1
an.party()
# So far 2
an.party()
# So far 3
```

## Playing with dir() and type()
* The `dir()` command lists capabilities
* Ignore the ones with underscores - these are used by Python itself
* The rest are real operations that the object can perform
* It is like type() - it tells us something *about* a variable

## Try dir() with a String
* We see all the string methods and the underscore methods
* We can use dir() to find the capabilities of our newly created class

## Object Lifecycle
* Objects are created, used and discarded
* We have special blocks of code (methods) that get called
    * At the moment of creation (constructor)
    * At the moment of destruction (destructor)
* Constructors are used a lot
* Destructors are seldom used

```Python
class PartyAnimal:
    x = 0

    def __init__(self):
        print('I am constructed')

    def party(self):
        self.x += 1
        print('So far', self.x)

    def __del__(self):
        print('I am destructed', self.x)

an = PartyAnimal()
# I am constructed
an.party()
# So far 1
an.party()
# So far 2
an = 42 
# I am destructed 2

print('an contains', an)
```

Constructor and destructor are optional

Constructors can have additional parameters. These can be used to set up instance variables for the particular instance of the class (i.e. for the particular object)

## Many instances
* We can create lots of objects - the class is the template for the object
* We can store each distinct object in its own variable
* We call this having multiple instances of the same class
* Each instance has its own copy of the instance variables


## Inheritance
* When we make a new class - we can reuse an existing class and inherit all the capabilities of an existing class and then add our own little bit to make our new class
* Another form of store and reuse
* Write once - reuse many times
* The new class (child) has all the capabilities of the old class (parent) - and then some more

## Terminology: Inheritance
'Subclasses' are more specialised versions of a class, which inherit attributes and behaviours from their parent classes, and can introduce their own.

## Definitions
* Class
    - A template
* Attribute
    - A variable within a class
* Method
    - A function within a class
* Object
    - A particular instance of a class
* Constructor
    - Code that runs when an object is created
* Inheritance
    - The ability to extend a class to make a new class


## Summary
* Object oriented programming is a very structured approach to code reuse
* We can group data and functionality together and create many independent instances of a class
